# **6 Related work**

**Understanding refusal in language models.** Wei et al. (2024) demonstrate that removing a set of safety-critical neurons and ranks can degrade safety mechanisms while preserving utility. Zheng et al. (2024) and Zou et al. (2023a) both use contrastive pairs of harmful and harmless inputs to identify the model’s representation of _harmfulness_ , asserting that this direction is distinct from the model’s representation of _refusal_ . Zheng et al. (2024) argue this by showing that safety prompts shift activations in a distinct direction, while Zou et al. (2023a) show that the representation is not significantly altered by adversarial suffixes. Note that this is in contrast to our findings in §5.1 that the refusal direction is significantly suppressed in the presence of an adversarial suffix. Zou et al. (2023a) additionally introduce a “piece-wise” intervention to effectively amplify representations of harmfulness, and show that this intervention increases refusal on harmful inputs even when jailbreaks are applied. Panickssery et al. (2023) use contrastive multiple-choice completions, finding that steering with the resulting vector is effective at modulating refusal in multiple-choice settings but not in long-form generation. Wang and Shu (2024) introduce a “Trojan Activation Attack” that adds steering vectors to bypass refusal during inference. Li et al. (2024b) identify a “safety pattern” by selecting individual neurons in each layer, and modulate refusal by zeroing out these neurons, although with unclear effects on the overall model performance. 

**Features as directions.** Extracting feature directions from contrastive pairs of inputs is an established technique (Burns et al., 2022; Panickssery et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023a). It is well understood that adding feature vectors to the residual stream can modify behavior (Li et al., 2024a; Marks and Tegmark, 2023; Panickssery et al., 2023; Tigges et al., 2023; Turner et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023a), although details on how and where to intervene vary (Jorgensen et al., 2023; von Rütte et al., 2024). 

Various works show that directions in activation space have more “feature-like” properties than neurons do (Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Elhage et al., 2022; Geiger et al., 2024; Hernandez and Andreas, 2021; Li et al., 2021; Mikolov et al., 2013; Nanda et al., 2023; Park et al., 2023b). Recent works use sparse autoencoders to discover feature directions in an unsupervised manner (Bricken et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023; Templeton et al., 2024). The assumption that features are represented linearly has been effective for erasing concepts from language models (Belrose, 2023; Belrose et al., 2024; Guerner et al., 2023; Haghighatkhah et al., 2022; Ravfogel et al., 2020; Shao et al., 2022). 

**Undoing safety fine-tuning.** It is well known that fine-tuning on malicious examples is sufficient to undo safety guardrails (Lermen et al., 2023), even with minimal degradation of overall capabilities (Yang et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2023). Undoing refusal via fine-tuning requires examples of harmful instructions and completions, while our method requires only harmful instructions. Note however that fine-tuning can weaken safety guardrails even when data is benign (Pelrine et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023). Mechanistic interpretability works have provided initial evidence suggesting that fine-tuning does not significantly alter relevant internal circuitry (Jain et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024; Prakash et al., 2024). For example, Lee et al. (2024) fine-tune a model to make it less toxic, and find this behavioral modification can be undone simply by scaling a small number of MLP weights. 

**Jailbreaks.** The research area of circumventing restrictions on LLM behavior by _modifying the input_ has seen many different directions of work. Many models are vulnerable to _social engineering attacks_ (Perez et al., 2022; Shah et al., 2023b; Wei et al., 2023). One hypothesis for why this works is that such prompts modify the LLM assistant’s "persona" (Andreas, 2022; Park et al., 2023a; Shanahan et al., 2023). Preliminary experiments in §L suggest that our method does not change the model’s chat personality or behavior outside of refusal. 

9 

Optimized _adversarial suffixes_ (Andriushchenko et al., 2024; Liao and Sun, 2024; Zou et al., 2023b) can be appended to prompts to bypass refusal. In contrast, our method does not require any modifications to the input prompt, but has the obvious limitation that we require access to the model’s weights. However, note that transferability of jailbreak prompts optimized on open-weight models on black-box models is unclear (Meade et al., 2024). Jailbreak prompts may have significant impact on model performance (Souly et al., 2024), whereas our method does not (§4.3).
